[Music]
you
hello friends welcome back to the second
section on reasoning and judgment now in
the last class we looked at what is
reasoning and how does reasoning differ
from something called judgment and this
is in making and we define reasoning
judgment and decision-making as higher
order cognitive functions which really
mean that reasoning judgment and
decision-making into an including
problem-solving these are the
culmination point of any cognitive
process or any cognitions now what do I
mean by this as you discussed over and
over again the basic processes of
perception attention learning memory
they take in information from the
environment and create mental
representations and store it into the
memory what problem-solving and
reasoning judgment decision-making do is
make meaning out of these
representations by manipulating the
representations in specific patterns or
in specific ways so that is what are
these things do now what is reasoning
the reasoning is basically using certain
well-known principles or using certain
rules of law to validate certain premise
so that is what reasoning is all about
so these thing is making information or
waking from based on some previous
evidence making meaning of some mental
representations or making meaning from
somewhere from information which is
stored into the memory judgment is
basically a step ahead of what reasoning
is and so what judgment is basically is
to look at evidences provided by
reasoning and to make a DC to make
number of choices available or basically
to judge or to gather evidences against
all the alternate interpretations which
are available for a particular mental
representation or a particular
information which is in memory and this
is in making is a step ahead of judgment
in which what we tend to do is we tend
to choose among all the alternatives
which are available through judgments so
what judgment tends to do is
it sorts of filters all the available
interpretations which are reasoning and
decision-making then goes ahead and
makes a choice of what particular kind
of interpretation from the data that you
want to keep last class with these
informations we also look at something
called focus on errors and so why focus
of areas that need it and we looked at
the fact that focus of error is the
study of focus of errors deals because
errors tell you what is the amount of or
what is the number of hindrances which
are available in making correct
interpretations and so looking at errors
basically provides you with a lot of
information of what to do and what not
to do and so knowing about what not to
do actually trains help you train in a
particular way of thinking so that is
why we need to focus on errors now
beside that we also looked at two
different kinds of objective reasoning
which was there and these were
syllogisms are syllogistic reasoning and
something something called conditional
reasoning syllogistic reasoning and
conditional reasoning so these two types
of reasoning that we looked in the last
class now in terms of syllogisms what we
tend to do is we tend to validate the
existence of a conclusion from a premise
so promise' statements in insula justic
reasoning we are given certain
statements which are called premises now
these premises are valid or invalid so
we have to decide whether they are valid
or not and so based on this validity we
judge whether a particular conclusion
following two premises or two statements
which are there logically follow or not
that is what we do in syllogistic
reasoning so in in terms of syllogistic
reasoning in in another word what we
tend to do is couple of statements are
given each of the statements are valid
and so what we then need to do is based
on what the statements are we need to
define whether the conclusion that is
coming out of it is valid or not and
that is what is syllogistic reasoning
then we looked at some factors which
produce error and syllogistic reasoning
for example atmospheric effects bias
beliefs and so on and so forth
besides that we also looked another kind
deductive reasoning which is basically
called the conditional reasoning in
conditional reasoning what we have is we
have a statement which has an antecedent
and a precedent and these antecedent and
precedent part of a statement is in the
form of if and then and based on the
statement are looking at the statement
what we tend to then do is go ahead and
validate the existence of a conclusion
so basically a statement is given and
the statement is there now if then form
and we then look into it after looking
into it there is a conclusion which is
given and we need to then look at the
conclusion and a second premise is also
given so based on a statement and a
premise we have to decide whether the
conclusion logically follows or whether
it is validated and we looked at four
optional things which can happen so once
we have a statement in the event form
which has an antecedent dinner and a
consequent following that we have as a
premise now the premise can with the
with the statement with the engine
statement the premise can make four
different kind of possibilities one is
the premise can affirm the antecedent it
can deny the antecedent the premise can
affirm the consequent and the premise
can't deny the consequent and based on
that a conclusion is given and we have
to basically go ahead and tell what
whether the conclusion is valid or not
now the conclusion validly the
conclusion there are some shortcuts are
hearest in in this kind of a reasoning
and that is tolerance and what the
spoons and what does it really mean so
every time we have found the antecedent
or we denied the consequent the
conclusions are valid so these are the
out of the four possible responses these
two will always be true so if the
premise is validating the antecedent or
denying the consequent in those terms
the conclusions which follows from the
premise and the statement will always be
true so that's what our conditional
statement or occur are a conditional
logic or a conditional reasoning really
works beside that we also saw several
factors which go ahead and produce
errors in conditional billing
now one thing is in deductive reasoning
we always look at validity of a
statement so validator first statement
says that the fact that whether the the
conclusion is a logical conclusion or a
logical following from the premises or
the precedence which has been given we
never look at the truth conditions so
there's a difference between a truth
conditions and and a valid condition a
valid condition may or may not be true
but a truth condition is always valid
and so that that is the one difference
and so in these in deductive reasoning
we never look at that another
interesting thing that we that we have
to understand is that deductive
reasoning is basically coming from
general to specific so you have a
general conclusion some general
conclusions given to you and then you
have to go ahead and testify or verify
specific statements and that's the
format of water or deductive reasoning
is in today's class what we're going to
do is they're going to look at another
form of reasoning which is called
inductive reasoning or inferential
reasoning and so inductive reasoning
what we tend to do is we tend from
specific we need to generalize
statements so specific instances are
given and from those specific instances
we have to come up with a general
conclusion and so one primary difference
between inductive and deductive
reasoning is inductive reasoning it is
basically coming from general to
specific so it's more of less like a
top-down process and so what happens
here is that there are certain general
conclusions which are given and a
specific thing has to be our specific
statement has to evaluate against it in
comparison inductive reasoning goes the
opposite way certain specific statements
are given to you and so from those
specific statements you have to then go
ahead and follow a general conclusion
and so that is what inductive reasoning
is all about so this is one difference
which is that now in terms of deductive
reasoning
we already look at the validity of the
conclusion and so that is the core of
deduct
reasoning whereas an inductive reasoning
we look at conclusions in terms of the
strength so conclusions are never 100%
valid 100% true and so we always in
deductive reasoning we look in the
strength of a conclusion so how strength
II or what is the probability of the
conclusion to be holding true and so
that is what we do in inductive
reasoning so inductive reasoning is
making inferences and all around the
world all around you you will always
look at in mind active raising so
another kind of reasoning is inductive
reasoning let's then go ahead and
understand what inductive reasoning is
all about so inductive reasoning we
reason from specific pieces of data or
information towards a general conclusion
for example statements like Barney is a
dog who box and from that and then
Fallon is a dog who also box robin is
another dog which also box and from that
if we conclude that all dogs go ahead
and bark is basically what is inductive
reasoning so there are three specific
statements which are there I have shown
you three different or I have narrated
three different instances of it so all
three dogs that I have mentioned
actually bark and from that if we go
ahead and conclude that all dogs or most
dogs actually about is what is inductive
reasoning so this is from coming from
specific data to general data specific
to general and so that is the kind of
reasoning that we need to do here so
unlike deductive reasoning where
conclusions are labeled as valid or
invalid on in terms of absolute
certainty we do not look this in
inductive reasoning what we tend to do
inductive reasoning is it leads to
uncertainty inclusions that vary in
strength so from the very outset itself
inductive reasoning implies the fact
that the conclusions will be uncertain
they will not be certain at all in terms
of deductive reasoning the statements
are always certain and so the what we
need to do is find out the validating of
the statement but in inductive reasoning
we know that the conclusions are never
fully certain and so what we need to do
inductive reasoning is to find out the
strength of certainty which is there so
we never get a hundred percent certain
statements for example look at the three
statements which have been given here
now the first statement says that
Professor X get
upset when asked if she will issue a
paper extension and then there is
another statement which says professor
why won't accept late papers and a third
statement which says that professor said
takes 20% off each day if a paper is
late now there are three statements
which have been given and so an
inductive reasoning we now need to
conclude and so the more of this
conclusion from these three statements
out there could be that professors most
professors actually do not like late
papers as you see professor X gets upset
why won't accept late papers the thread
would deduct some amount of marks from
your late papers and so it is believed
from here we can conclude that most
professors actually do not like a late
paper and so that is what is inductive
reasoning right so if we zan and cortman
in 1984 describes some characteristics
that seem to defy inductive reasoning so
that's how we don't elective reasoning
so these people they gave some
characteristics that seem to typify what
inductive reasoning is all about now the
product of in the inductive reasoning
it's not necessarily correct inductive
arguments are evaluated in terms of
strength rather than in terms of their
validity so basically it's saying that
inductive statements what what it says
is the inductive statements are not
always correct in nature inductive
arguments are not always correct in
nature and so assuming that most people
or most professors will not allow late
papers will lead you to not submitting a
late paper and so even if there is a
chance for a late paper submission you
might miss it so if you make this kind
of statements or if you make this kind
of conclusions the strength of a
conclusion being very weak that most
professors do not go ahead and accept
late papers then even if there is a
chance for you to give a late paper you
will not attempt it because this is what
the conclusion is and you you kept the
strictness you paid the conclusion in a
strictest possible sense and so you are
not availing that thing because there
are those three pieces of data and from
these three pieces of data you are
making a genuine conclusion and so even
if there is a chance for a late paper
you might not follow it and might not
get a chance to submit a late paper
which might have happen from any reason
and so that is what it says so one of
the things is that arguments their
inductive arguments
inductive arguments are evaluated in
terms of this strength rather than the
in terms of the validity so it's not in
terms of validity conclusions from
negative arguments are not evaluated in
terms of whether they're valid or not
whether they are logically following or
not it is evaluated in terms of whether
it is certain or not or whether it is
necessary correct or not and the second
point to be noted here or the second
factor a characteristic of inductive
reasoning then we noted here is that
pointed out that inductive reasoning
there is a need for constraints on the
kind of conclusions that you would draw
not since inductive reasoning is coming
from specific to general all kind of
conclusions can be drawn from it and so
we have to be very constrained of what
conclusion we are drawing an inductive
reasoning and so this is one thing that
we are to note we cannot draw very weird
statements or very weird conclusion sort
of it example1 weird conclusion that can
be drawn from this particular thing or
this particular statement which has been
given at the top here example look at
statement 1 2 & 3 is that professors
with the name XY and Z will not accept
late papers and this is not true because
if we draw this kind of a conclusion
that these kind of professors which have
named XY and Z or has an x y&z on the
name they will not accept late papers
is not a valid conclusion and so there
is no truth into it there is no
certainty to into it and so this kind of
constraints has to be looked at or these
kinds of constraints have to be we have
to be very aware of these things
so in inductive reasoning two things you
have to when making conclusion graph to
be very very or we have to be worried
about two things first that we do not
actually look ahead at the strength at
the validity of our conclusion we look
at the strength of the conclusion right
and the second thing in inductive
reasoning we are to be very sure about
is that we should not be making two
unconstraint conclusions so if we make
to one constraint and strain conclusion
then it's not a good to be worried about
this now there assert what type of rules
or instances support inductive reasoning
what kind of processor support mental
structure support inductive really so
researchers disagree on whether
induction is based on formal rule based
processing or more complex bond
experience we
not heuristic processing so there are a
division of people or they're a division
of psychologists who who differ between
what kind of mental processes work into
it so there are groups which believe
that there is a strict rule driven or a
strict formal logic driven way of
looking at how inductive reasoning work
and there is another group of
psychologists who believe that it is
more context one that's more about a
curious which is there now the
rule-based view term as the strict or
stylistic view say that inductive
reasoning involves special processes and
representations that operate in the
abstract outside any real-life context
and so what this view believes that the
rule weighs view believes that inductive
reasoning basically follow a rule based
system and so there is a logic to it
there is a rule based system to it and
this deal based system works in an
abstract manner
outside any real context to give the
conclusions whereas income in the
directrix opposition to this the context
based view or and lose view as it is
called they contend that inductive
reasoning involves updating the strength
of one's belief based on recall of
specific instances and so the news view
or the contextual view says that
inductive reasoning is based on how
quickly can you validate your belief
from past experience and that will give
the strength to the conclusion that you
are drawing and so this is what the
difference is one group looks at the
strictness of logic or sect or they
believe that rules and logics are
followed and that leads to this kind of
a reasoning or inductive reasoning the
other group believes that it is our
beliefs or it is our past experiences
which strengthens our belief on the
logic on the conclusion that we are
deriving from inductive reasoning and
that leads to a good inductive reasoning
or those processes leads to inductive
reasoning inductive reasoning is present
everywhere and that's why I'm written
the omnipresence of inductive reasoning
omnipresence is a phenomena where
something is present everywhere and so
that's what we tend to do here so only
presence of inductive reasoning really
means the reductive reasoning is present
everywhere and we look into it yes
inductive reasoning actually is present
everywhere in most problem-solving or in
terms of most problems are in strategies
inductive reasoning is the idea about it
two examples of specific city of the
omnipresence of inductive reasoning is
it is used in categorization so remember
from the section on categorization in
concept we look at something or
categorization so what do we do in
categorization mostly in categorization
what we tend to do is we look at
specific elements and from the specific
elements we find the commonality and
from terms of the commonality then we go
ahead and then form a category so those
factors which are common in many
specific instances from the rule for the
categorization and that is basically
coming from specific to general so
induct and that is what is inductive
reasoning inductive reasoning is coming
from
specifics to general so inductive
reasoning provides another view or
thought with phenomena known as
something called typicality can be
viewed and so in not only in terms of
categorization the answer to typicality
effect that we saw in categorization and
in somatic memory can be explained in
terms of inductive reasoning now look at
the statement which has been given here
there are two statements that I have one
is Robin is susceptible to this is a
therefore all words are susceptible to
disease a this is one statement and the
other statement is Turkey's are
susceptible to disease B and all birds
are susceptible to disease and sorry
this should be a is your character and
should be correct here
the thing is in which of the statement
do you think people are going to
becoming more definite conclusions so
which of the statement has more
conclusive or has more strength in terms
of certainty and so you will see that
most people then turn out to the fact
that statement one is more true the
reason for why the statement one is more
true is because Robin is a more typical
bird and so it is more typical word and
so the conclusions are more valid and so
it's more of a it represents more of a
bird and that kind of inductive
reasoning or that kind of a specificity
from there we draw the conclusion and so
drawing conclusions in terms of this is
better then in terms of this where
turkeys are more typical bird and so in
this case the conclusions drawn from
statement one is has more strength
in terms of believability now subjects
rate argument one is more likely to be
true because Robins are seen as more
typical birds and turkeys that's what
I've been telling you that statement one
is verified by more number of people
simply because of the reason their
problems are more typical birds now
another interesting phenomena observed
in inductive reasoning about
categorization means this may be
something called the diversity effect so
just like as we have seen in the
typicality effect there is something
called diversity effect so what is
diversity effect not look at the two
statement which have been given here and
tell me which of these statements are
more likely to be true or more likely to
happen so we have statement one which
says that robins are susceptible to
disease why sparrows are susceptible to
disease why therefore all birds are
susceptible to disease why other hand we
have these statement which says
cardinals are susceptible to bcz turkeys
are susceptible to disease ed and
therefore all birds are susceptible to
disease it so which of the statements do
you think that should be true and if you
are like most general people you will
believe that statement two is more true
then statement1 the chances of the
believability or statement true is more
than statement one now the reason the
reason here is that because cardinals
and turkeys are two end of the extreme
so we're starting for Cardinal to turkey
a whole new range of birds coming to it
but in number robins and sparrows they
are very close together kind of close
together birds which are there and so in
terms of believability effect we believe
that if you want to look at all birds
then cardinals and turkeys this
statement to end to hold more weight or
tend to generate more believability in
subjects then statement1 so in this case
people rated argument to a stronger
because cardinals and turkeys depends
more diverse set of birds and that's
what i've been saying since cardinals
and turkeys are on the two extremes of
it they're more diverse kind of words
different kind of words so more
different kind of words are tend to have
a particular disease we believe that
most birds have it
but since the sparrows and robins are
the same kind of same bird so people
don't believe it and so this is another
fact with something called inductive
reasoning the second fact so inductive
reasoning is not only in terms of
zatia nor the defendant only solved the
categorization problem inductive
reasoning is also seen in problem
solving for example one kind of
problem-solving which is called analog
in using problem solving using an
analogy basically this inductive
reasoning is used so another set of
cognitive process that depends
critically on inductive reasoning is
problem-solving most specifically
solving problems by analog II now
remember the radiation problem and the
war problem or the war attack problem
major problem war major problem that we
have known the thing is in in these
cases the problem was solved by using
analog machines in the since in the
radiation problem it was solved by using
many lasers of smaller strength or
smaller value which summated the the
amount of heat that is required the
amount of the strength of the laser that
is required for curing a disease by
using many lasers the similar thing was
used for the by the major by making an
analogy to this radiation problem and so
he then took a number of Tanks by
different different bridges and so
attacted on the wall so this kind of a
thing so basically what does this
analogy that we that we saw that they
major did in terms of the medical
problem in the radiation problem what he
tend to do is he tend to look at two
specific instances and from there he
deduce this thing that one way of using
a major strength or one way of
increasing strength of a particular
thing is using small bits of and sources
or many sources with small energy so
many sources of smaller energy is
equivalent to one source of bigger
energy why because many sources will sum
it up to bicker to equalize the energy
which is out there and so this is the
generality which is there so one of the
thing that happens in terms of inductive
reasoning is inductive reasoning is also
available or is also used in
problem-solving so that's a end to the
inductive reasoning thing now the next
step in the section is about judgment so
what is judgment inductive reasoning
involves arriving at general conclusions
based on specific pieces of what might
be called data so inductive reasoning is
basically arriving at control
general conclusions based on specific
data segments which are out there
so from specificity to generalization is
what induction is all about so but what
is judgment then so judgment is an
extension of inductive reasoning have
seen no a 2001 they define that judgment
is the human ability to infer estimate
and predict the character of an unknown
event so in judgment what we tend to do
is inductive reasoning will only provide
you with the conclusion but how what we
infer from the conclusion what we
estimate or what we predict from the
conclusion is what is called judgment
the judgment is that particular branch
or that particular higher cognitive
process which does what is which looks
at the data which looks at the
conclusion which has been provided by
reasoning and from there it makes
inferences or it makes predictions and
so judgment is a process of making
predictions and inferences from data or
from conclusions which have been drawn
through reasoning from data this data is
available out there through the basic
cognitive processes and so this
reasoning are of two types they're
deductive or the inductive reasoning and
so judgment is basically inferring or
making conclusions out of it and once
the conclusions are available choosing
one of these conclusions based on
cost-benefit analysis based on how much
you want to gain or how much you want to
lose is what is called decision-making
which we'll see in the next section so
let's go ahead and look at what is
judgment
so then judgment is a process of making
educated guess based on limited
information along with our previous
knowledge expectations and beliefs
so basically stereotyping so what
judgment tale says or what judgment
follows or what judgment predicts is
that they are judgments are basically
educated guesses which are based on some
kind of limited information if all the
information is available we will not
make limited guesses so as you know
mostly in the world we don't have all
the information available with you and
so there is always uncertainty and so
inductive reasoning is also done in
terms of uncertainty when we know don't
know the premises
or we don't know the valid is the
premises new do inductive reasoning from
specifics to general si that kind of a
thing and so when we want one we make
educated guesses on the limited computer
on the
information which is available or due to
limited computational power of the brain
that we have we make judgments right
along with and how do we do it
we do it in the basis of the knowledge
that we have the previous knowledge bit
that we have some kind of expectation
that we believe and some kind of
believes that we hold on to and this is
also equivalent to stereotyping
stereotyping is making some kind of a
prediction or making some kind of a
category for certain kind of people or
labeling people by a certain category or
a certain characteristic is what is
video typing for example we tend to do
all kinds of stereotype schools RT
breeches are also T this kind of people
is that that can educate people are more
nerdy so this kind of people is that and
so all these kind of stereotyping that
we tend to do women are core in
mathematics men are very good in
mathematics and so on and so forth so
this is basically stereotyping Serio
typing is classifying people based on
certain labels or certain
characteristics and that is what
judgment is all about so given the fact
that whatever knowledge we have whatever
information we have and whatever
experience and believe we have we merge
all them together and then make a give a
statement and this statement is
basically what is called judgment so
basing judgment on memory so there are
three kinds of purists or there are
three kind of mechanisms which are used
for making judgments and these judgments
are dependent on memory and so the first
kind of judgment that we tend to do or
the first kind of furious that we use in
making judgments are called the
availability heuristic it all about the
availability heuristic eight that we
base our estimates of likelihood or
probability on the ease with which we
can think of example so as example if I
give you this question that in your
whole life a number of people that you
have known what is the probability or
what is the one letter of the English
language from which their name starts
and so from all the people that you know
now immediately your answer will be S or
R or T or whatever it is s and r-mo to
base a sample which is now the thing is
it is basically called you have fallen
to something called availability or s
the reason that you know that s
is the most commonly used name out there
and to most names are existing or s and
they even they in the English dictionary
most words are there from s and so you
believe that s and are more common names
and so this is this has to be it and
that is what color of a list is all
about availability here this speaks that
the more clothes that we have the more
number of thing examples that we can
think about a particular problem that
that is what is call of ability units
and so you making predictions based on
that is what is called availability
theorists right and so that that is the
definition of it so the ability here is
is dependent on two main sub processes
the availability heuristic in defining
what availability orestes if we tend to
make judgments based on the fact that
how much example is available to you or
the ease with which we can think about
an example that is called availability
or s the easiest way that that is there
which we can think of an example if that
is how we make a judgment that is
availability or s right so it's
basically why do we need curious for
judging the we need jurists for making
judgment because the three things the
data may be huge first of all the data
available to you is huge and so we
cannot go through and organic approach
finding at the judgment second thing we
may lack the computational power since
the data is used we do not have enough
computational power to go ahead and
compute the outputs of it and so we use
a here is and the third is that
computational power is there the data is
huge and it is ambiguous in nature and
so we tend to use units for viewing it's
not cut and so that kind of thing is
that now the availability here is it
depends on two means of processes which
is there the first is called biased and
coding now why does the availability
heuristic
be there the availability heuristic
means there because it could be an
encoding problem or it could be a
problem lead to do travel there as an
encoding problem it availability
heuristic an happen because an
overestimation of certain facts in
memory are done because you tend to
overestimate certain things right now as
I asked you the question of how many
people that you remember from us
English language the idea is that since
you most people that you meet or this
knowledge this is given to you is that s
is what you think to meet or re is what
you tend to know more people this kind
of our representation in memory
basically makes you use the materials
now this in turn makes the bias
retrieved from the memory as the
information stored in memory is bias
example media over estimation right so
one of the things for probability
interest is bias encoding and this bias
encoding could happen from media also in
a day to day world we look at a lot of
media we look at a lot of news a lot of
information which is out there and so
these informations they are most of the
time they are biased and the fact that
since media feeds us with so much
information and there is an effect which
is called recency effect right so the
medias and speeds up with feeds are with
so much information we tend to believe
it or for example one of the thing that
can happen in availability grace is the
media has been trying all along these
days that for example looking at here
what is happening is the weather is
going to be foggy and so even if it is
sunny since the media keeps on saying
this over and over again and everywhere
we talk to people we tend to believe
that it will be a foggy weather since it
is winter and so on and so forth
even if the weather is very sunny the
conclusion that it is winter or the fact
that it is winter and that media is
overestimating something that leads to
the fact or using of or that's lead us
to make use of the ability erase and
predict that or basically think that the
weather is going to be all foggy and so
one of the reasons is this thing that
arguably viewless is bias encoding now
VAS encoding also can happen with its as
I said there is something called a
recency effect or these days the media
if you go into the media it is all about
political we all believe that most
people are at this point of time are
turning towards Hinduism are turning
towards the construction of the Mandara
that kind of now the media is saved in
the information to us and so we believe
that all over India this is what is
going to happen that most people are
running towards Hinduism or favor the
RAM band-aid or whatever this kind of
information is there and so this is what
availability heuristic since the media
is feeding us this information this is
the claim that we have made
this is the idea judgment that is we
have made and so we also turn ourselves
to that kind of a thing or align
ourselves to it because we tend to
believe that this is what it is
now although if you look into if we go
all on our own and start looking at
people's belief system or what people
believe all over and they are talking to
different different people we may not
find the kind of representation that
media is giving us right and since we
are trusting the media the kind of
representation that they are giving
based on that we believe that this is
what the nature of or this is what the
mood of the country is based on what
they say another kind of effect another
kind of reason for why availability
heuristic says success is something
called bias retrial and what does it
mean
it says the availability can lead us to
astray from sampling process bias in the
sampling process what does it mean so at
times the retrieval of information is
also bias from memory and that leads to
the availability and or that's leads to
the kind of bias which is there for
example try the following and state
whether there is more of number two
statement or more of number one
statement tell me six-letter words that
have a letter n in the fifth letter or a
six letter word where the fifth letter
is an end how many do you think will
exist so whether you think this is more
or the second is tell me words that fit
the pattern I n G now which do you think
is going to be more and so obviously the
answer that most of you are going to
come up with is this one is more the
second is more than the first now if you
realize that this is ing ending right
and so if you believe that this is more
you are wrong the reason being that this
is a subset of the second a subset of
first so all ing words will be six
letter words with a fifth letter ending
and ending but there are also other
words which have a fifth letter than n
and may not have an ing ending and so
one two is actually a subset of the
letter two or the statement two is
subset of one and so they make it can
never be more than this and so this is
another problem which is there a biased
retrieval itself since the way we
retrieve information itself is biased
that can be too
the use of availability theorists and
the third thing is called illusory
correlations and that can also lead to
the availability heuristic in and what
does it really mean in terms of illusory
correlation it says that primarily
coincidences two events will seem to be
linked when they are really not and that
is what is called illusory correlation
so if two events tend to happen together
and just because of just because of a
coincidence we tend to rate them
together for example we often hear state
saying statement that cricketer was not
playing very good in the first match he
didn't place where you go to the second
match he didn't play very good third
match and fourth madman and he hit a
century and so this kind of a
correlation saying that three times he
didn't play good and the fourth time he
essentially and so that was making the
correlation between three three after
each three time you perform better that
type of idea that if you perform three
times bad the fourth time is always good
is there a reason any correlation making
correlations that really so because each
time the hit the play is the probability
of what he tends to do the probability
of how the output turns out to be is
only 0.5 either it does good or does bad
and so each event is independent of
itself so basing the our idea that after
three bad runs the fourth run is going
to be a good run here is already
correlation or something another example
is Sports Illustrated jinx the same
thing that I was talking about that if
some some something bad is going on or
if some particular model or a sports
person appear on some particular journal
sports magazine and since this magazine
is known to ruin the life of many people
if a person who is doing good in sports
appear on that particular magazine front
cover then his life is going to get bad
is what is availability here rest and so
this is irizarry
correlation and so this kind of
correlations are also the reason for
availability heuristic
now another kind of thing that we need
to know another kind of information that
we hear is that we tend to use is called
the recognition hearest and so what is
recognition Yunus is often used when we
have faced with two alternatives one
that we recognized and the other that we
don't
cognise and so in cases that the
information which is available to you
through reasoning one information we
recognize very nicely the other
recombination we don't have an idea
about we tend to pick up that
recognition we tend to become that data
point that conclusion which is available
to us or which we are familiar to and
that is called the recognition here is
so in this case what happens is if two
conclusions are drawn from a body of
data and through proper reasoning we
tend to make judgments favorable in
terms of the one statement which we are
close to or which we recognize better
then the one we don't recognize better
and this is called the recognition URIs
and that recognition here is the leading
cause for the availability availability
forest or the availability heuristics
that we tend to use in making judgment
now another kind of heuristics that we
tend to use in making judgment is called
the representative representative Urist
and what is this
it is basing judgment on similarity at
times we tend to make judgments we tend
to make conclusions draw conclusions
from evidences based on the fact of how
similar a particular set of data looks
to us so when we are trying to place a
person in a particular category or
judgment we rely on representative here
is rely on representation here is the
degree to which people represent some
basic idea of that object for example if
we see somebody who's six feet too tall
and he's walking immediately then we
will tend to think that this person
would be a basketball player because
somehow it is related it is similar that
people who are taller basketball players
similarly if we see and we have several
kind of examples of somebody use Y it's
somebody who's fair somebody is not fair
and all of these are related to certain
such kind of similarities which is out
there and so this is what is represented
a representation here is so what does a
definition of in this says it's rely on
your positive your is the degree to
which an object represents a basic idea
the more object or more event represents
in our memory a particular kind of
category the more representative we
believe it is to me the more similarity
we believe it to it and that is what is
called similarity
restore her presentative your wrists now
why do we get a fall to the idea of
representing here is or why do you do we
actually make errors in representation
or repel why do we use
representativeness one basic problem
which has been or one basic reason why
people tend to use similarity here is or
representative Eurus is because they
ignore something called base rate
fallacy now what is based rate fallacy
the main straight fallacies any event
has a certain rate of occurrence a
certain base rate of occurrence and so
if we over represent that we note that
base rate we tend to fall into this base
rate fallacy
so people mostly commit the base rate
fallacy and what is it
ignoring the rate of occurrence of a
particular category in a particular
sample right and so let's say if we know
a family of people in which two people
are tall let's say the son in the father
is tall we tend to believe that
everybody plays a basketball in that
family now that is called base rate
fallacy the event of father and son or
the instance of other and son are
independent of each other and that
doesn't say that everyone is tall in the
family and so we cannot say it is a
family of basketball players even in any
basketball family it not everybody will
playing it and the idea that everybody
is a sports person in that particular
family is wrong and that is called base
rate fallacy that is how often a certain
event tends to occur so when we tend to
ignore the fact that how often a
particular event is going to occur a
certain event is going to occur that is
called the base rate fallacy thereby
getting a biased of similarity for
example consider the classic
demonstration by Kahneman and Tversky so
Kahneman and Tversky presented a problem
and I'll show you that problem so he
gave this statement to people and give
the following instruction now panel of
psychologists have interviewed in an
instant first energy test on 30
engineers and 70 lawyers and all
successful in their field now on the
basis of this information thumbnail
descriptions for each of these
individuals have been written for each
description please indicate the
probability in the person described is
an engineer from one to hundred so a
certain kind of statement is given and
in that statement there are certain base
rates which are given and that is what
people tend to over rate now base rates
are there are 30 engineers
seventy there are lawyers out there and
the total they are hundred and what we
have to tell is that a description is
given to you and this based on this
description you have to tell me whether
the person I am describing is an
engineer or not and then rate it in one
of an hundred and so what is the
descriptions subject were then given the
following description this is the
description which is given jack is a 45
year old man he is married and has four
children he is generally conservative
careful and ambitious he shows no
interest in politics and social issues
and spends most of his time on many
hobbies which include home carpentry
sailing and mathematical puzzles this
kind of a person profile is given to you
right and so then you are asked to do
this so subjects were a turn on the rate
of probability that Jack was an engineer
what do you think happened what is the
probability that Jack was an engineer
and immediately you will say that it is
above 50 percent or 50 to 60 percent
what you are ignoring here or you are
making an error this is incorrect
the thing is this words that are used
here in terms of his hobbies which says
that is thus carpentry sailing
mathematical puzzle makes you believe
that he is an engineer but you know that
in this particular thing
seventy percent people are lawyer and so
there is never a chance that you will
have 70 person or they will have 50%
chances that he is an engineer there are
only 30 engineers out there and so they
cannot be extending 50 percent right and
so that is the error that you're doing
because the base rate is only 30
engineers and 70 lawyers and so no
matter what this statement says in terms
of his thing of carpentry selling and
mathematics because we tend to do what
we tend to do is we intend to ignore the
base rate and make similarity statements
that people who are who does carpentry
or people who does sailing or does
mathematical jobs tend to be engineers
right why can't I rather do with it is
because of stereotypes we believe that
this is the stereotype of water engineer
isn't this is the video type of lawyers
and so what this is what the result they
also got so when they gave when not
given the profile the probability that a
randomly drawn name was an engineer was
30 up 100 or 30% higher when the profile
was given most people in
to judge that a random name was a
engineer bus 50 person and this is their
air because they ignored the Baystate
then if there are 30 engineers the
property cannot be 50% no use of
representative URIs and the confirmation
tendency to ignore base rate may relate
to something called racial profiling so
when we tend to say that certain kind of
races are our people who are blacks tend
to do more tend to be more teased or
tend to be do more violent acts this is
basically called racial profiling or
rate people who are blacks has to be
more criminal in nature this is basic
because we ignore the base rate we
believe that if some people some black
people do it we tend to over extrapolate
it and believe that any black that we
see we tend to believe that he is the
one who's doing this kind of thing now
another interesting thing or another
reason why this kind of representatives
theorist is used or the representative
jurist tend to fail us in making
judgment is this conjugation fantasy and
what does the conjugation fallacy really
say the conjugation fallacy is another
cause for bias which are caused by
stereotyping what does it say so Travis
Qian can men demonstrated this fallacy
at work so then the conjugation fallacy
is if there are two events a and B and
they occur together they co-occur
together what is the probability of both
happening together so let's first look
at the statement and then I'll explain
you how this bias really happens so this
is the statement that Kahneman and
Tversky gave people so Linda is thirty
one-year-old she is single outspoken and
very bright she is majored in philosophy
as a student she was deeply consumed
with issues of discrimination and social
justice and also participated in
anti-nuclear demonstrations so this this
is the basic profile of this person now
the subjects were asked to decide
whether it was more likely that she was
a bank teller or a bank teller who was
active in feminist movement and so
without looking at anything in return
the slide after this tell me what you
think most people will agree that
statement two is correct that Linda is a
bank teller who's active in feminist
movement the reason being that the last
line of this says that these fields
consumed with discrimination and social
justice and also participated in
anti-nuke
mission and so on and so forth and so
you believe that second is having the
more probability but you are wrong the
reason being that why can't a bank
teller have all this thing and so the
chances that she is a bank teller is
higher than the chances that he's a bank
teller who was active in all these
things because any bank teller can have
this right now this is what is called
the conjugation policy or the
conjugation fallacy which is out there
now the probability of statement 1 was
0.5 and the probability of statement 2
was 0.5 and when we Club them together
when we conjugate them together the
probability always has to be 0.25 and
that is called the conjugation fallacy
when the conjugate to events together
the probability will always be lower so
bank teller who is activate from an ism
will have a cost probability of 0.25
whereas a bank teller independently
you're a feminist has a probability of
0.5 and so this conjugation people don't
understand this conjugation and they
tend to realize that this will be more
whereas this has to be less because
that's what probability says right so
that's what it is now the next thing
that we look into is another reason for
this bias and that is called
misinterpretation of cluster events now
when given our event that has two ways
of working out such as a coin flip
people tend to misconstrue with a random
sequence should look like so people what
they tend to do is they tend to
misconstrue it they can't tend to
misrepresent what a random sequence is
all about or how randomization really
works and in this case if I give them if
I give you to judge whether this is more
probable or this is more probable you
tend to tell me that this is more
probable because it looks like more
random whereas if you look into it both
have an equal probability of occurring
and none of them are random events so
this has a probability of 1/12 upon or
12 probability and here also is the same
a single event happening that is what it
is and so both events are non random in
sequence but since this looks more
random to you you misconstrue that this
is more random and you believe that they
as a higher probability of occurring and
this is the Miss calibration that you
tend to do then this is because this
looks more subtle this looks more
arranged and so cannot be a random
sequence now examples of
misinterpretation of cluster events what
is the interpretation of this
misinterpretation of cluster events one
example is called the hot hand and what
is it the tendency to miss perceive even
clusters as indicating non-randomness
may underlie when sports fan Thomas
Horton waters what is hot hand hot hand
is basically a feature in which we
believe that if some player is going
very well he is burning hot white like
the Sun and so in the next match also is
going to do well so if we are looking at
if you're looking at coldly batting and
we believe that in one to three match he
has done good we believe that the fourth
match also is going to do good because
he is in that streak that winning streak
and so that is the problem each match is
independent of itself and each player is
independent of itself and his own
probability and the chances that because
he did good in three matches the fourth
match is going to do good is something
called the hot time similarly is called
something called gamblers fallacy and so
what happens in gamblers fallacy we tend
to believe that if we are failing if a
gambler is failing or if we are not
getting good results then the next
result that is going to be good is going
is or coming is going to be good because
it is due in US and that's called called
gamblers fallacy so if you are playing
let's say a card game and three times
you have failed we believe that the
fourth time you are going to win the
reason being that it is this winning is
due on your three failures will lead to
the fourth inning where as we all know
that each event is independent of itself
and each has an independent probability
of 1 upon 6 in terms of adye's 1 upon 53
in terms of a card game or so on and so
forth and so that is what the difference
is all about and the last fear is that
we need to see here is something called
the anchoring and adjustment your s and
what is anchoring and adjustment
theories in many cases judgment people
start with an idea or standard in mind
and the initial estimate of the first
impression tends to make ourself as
overly biased so in anchoring and
adjustment here is what we tend to do is
before making judgments we anchor
ourselves we we look inside ourselves
for our experiences and
leave that this is what the value should
be and then we tend to then make
judgments based on the anchor that we
have kept so we tend to look into
ourselves and believe that this is how
it something is going to be so if let's
take an example so if you ask your
parent that you give a statement to a
parent saying that this is what I spend
each day they will anchor that when they
were your age what is the amount of
money that they used to spend and based
on then they'll make adjustments and say
that you are overspending because when
they were young and they were at your
age they used to spend let's say 10
rupees per day and based on that they
made some calculations of what over the
years that have been given and so
they'll say that your daily spending
should be 50 rupees but you know that 50
rupees is not what is good and so this
anchoring adjustment is another problem
with a heuristic what they tend to do is
what they tend to do when they were when
they were little like you they would
make that statement or they will make
that an anchor and then make adjustments
and based on that decide your pocket
money or decide decide your daily
spending and that is what is called
anchoring and adjustment units so the
URIs involved in these judgments is
terms anchoring and adjustment a good
example of this is something called the
spotlight effect what is spotlight
effect in spotlight effect what really
happens is somebody is wearing so if I
wear a taunt loss and when I enter the
room I believe that everybody is looking
at me and I become overly conscious the
fact is that nobody looks at me so when
you wear a pink shirt or very very
yellow shirt to class you're made to
wear a yellow shirt to class you believe
that everybody is looking at you - and
this is called the spotlight effect and
this is a good example of anchoring and
adjustment the reason is that you anchor
yourself saying that I am since I'm
wearing this disgusting clothes and so
everybody is looking at you and then you
make the adjustment that everybody's
looking at you you make yourself the
anchor and then you make this adjustment
everyone's looking at you and so you
overestimate the number of that people
look at you and a number of experiments
are done where it was people were made
to do this kind of a disgusting wearing
cloth going into into a room and they
were later asked how many people noticed
you and the people were actually asked
how many people noticed it and it was
founded there was a huge gap of how many
people actually noticed them and how
many people did the person wearing that
is going
or actually thought we're looking at and
this is called the anchoring and
adjustment purist now our judgments can
also be biased or our judgments can also
be faulty in terms of certain biases
which are out there so biases and
judgments can also arise from the fact
that at times we are not good at
estimating how much we know or when we
knew it now a couple of biases of this
type is called one of the biases called
the hindsight bias and what is hindsight
bias people often seem to know for sure
of what something has occurred that they
knew things would work out just the way
they are and this is the tendency of
what is called I knew it all along
hindsight bias and some so at times a
hindsight bias of how what people think
that they knew is what is the bias or
what is the kind of error that can
happen in terms of judgments and it is
more evident in civil suit so in civil
suit a judge has to determine the
probability defendant would have
foreseen the what would obtain people
would have done so let's say that the
plaintiff did some kind of a or
defendant did some kind of an gross
negligence and this class knowledgeable
negligence leads to some kind of a
problem to a plaintiff now the plaintiff
then goes ahead and files a defamation
suit against the defendant for certain
kind of money or certain kind of
compensation
now the plaintiff will go to code as
well and not the court person who's the
judge has to decide whether the
defendant would have seen that this kind
of whatever act he did from that this
kind of problem would have arisen to the
plaintiff or not and so most judges then
fall to this error of hindsight bias and
believe that the defendant could have
very easily a certain that if he did
something this is the kind of problem
don't have arisin and would have made
the plaintiff suffer and they rule in
favor of it and so this basically what
is hand-side bias it is basically the
fact that people say that I knew it all
longer the bias that people think that
they knew all along and they didn't look
into it though that kind of a thing is
the hindsight bias another kind of bias
is something called miss calibration of
confidence so at times we tend to miss
calibrate of confidences about something
and we take
make errors for example the fact that we
overestimate the extent to which we knew
something was going to happen
demonstrates our insensitivity to what
we knew and what what we knew and when
we do it and sometimes we tend to make
our confidences we tend to overconfident
of what is going to happen and when it
is going to happen for example any kind
of thing that we can take so if an
experiment were done in which people
were given a statement to verify and
they were asked to first be positive
that whatever statement was meant to be
verified they have to be first-rate
their confidences and then based on the
confidences the truth values generated
so a certain statement was given to
people and they were asked to rate this
statement as correct or not and their
confidence ratings were done so it it
was found out then people who said that
they were 100% confident that they knew
the statement was true it was founded
the accuracy was 75 percent only and
people who read who we're lower in terms
of confidences we had more accurate
accuracies and so this kind of errors do
arise and that is called Miska
liberation of confidences all right so
in this particular section then on
reasoning and judgment what we tended to
do is they tended to carry forward from
what we did in the last section in the
last section we looked at what is
reasoning and we looked at something
called deductive reasoning in terms of
conditional raising and syllogistic
reasoning in today's lecture what we did
was we looked at what is called
inductive reasoning and what what is the
format of an inductive reasoning and
what are the possible errors which can
be there from there on we move into
something called judgment which is
making basically making meaning or based
on the evidences providing some kind of
estimate that is what judgment is all
about and so we looked at what is
judgment and we looked at three basic
types of heuristics which can affect
judgment the availability heuristic
intuitive viewers and the anchoring and
adjustment theorists and in addition to
that we also looked at what is biases
the kind of biases that can be
and these biases how they can affect our
judgment - for example one is called the
hindsight bias I knew it all wrong kind
of a thing so this this you tend to have
happen to know all the time when you
fail you tend to say that I knew it all
along and so that kind of a bias is
always there because you tend to say
that you knew it all wrong and then
there was second bias which was
misinterpreting confidences of how
confidence you are on to something so
this is the end of the section on
reasoning and judgment when we meet next
we will be discussing a section on
decision making and we'll be carrying on
some of the things that we have learned
there learned here on to that and we
look at how people make choices of
judgments that has been done so when a
reasoning is done and out of that
reasoning certain judgments or certain
kind of judgments are evaluators that
kind of facts are brought forward and
certain kind of rules are laid out how
do we choose among the alternatives
which are available after judgment that
is what a decision-making that is what
we going to see in the next section or
this is their making how choices are
made among the alternatives which are
available after judgment and reasoning
thank you
[Music]
you